We start by selecting an image that has the potential to be a good candidate for constructing a level. This potential is primarily determined by the shape of the outline of the object represented by the image, as the content, lighting, coloring, resolution, size and even format is not of any concern of us for the purposes of generating a level. This is because the only use of the input image, the raster image, for us is to convert the input image into a vector image, specifically a Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) image, before executing the code that actually generates a Science Birds structure. Since this code operates on an SVG image, specifically an SVG image with a `polygon` element, all the operation that we do before feeding an SVG image that contains a `polygon` element to the code can be simply understood as the "preprocessing stage" for constructing a Science Birds structure. Nevertheless, in order to start with a raster image and attain a Science Birds structure, all the steps in the preprocessing stage are necessary. These steps can be listed as follows:

1. Converting a raster image to black-and-white.
The reason for this is actually clear. We have stated that the content, lighting, coloring, resolution size or format of the image is of no concern to us, as we have stated that the only use of the image is the outline of the structure represented in that image. We have also stated that the raster image, for the purposes of generating a Science Birds structure is of no use to us, since it is not possible (or, straightforward) to obtain the outline data of the image from the raster image. Since that's the case, content, lighting and similar are simply redundant information for all of our purposes. Hence, in order to have an easier and more precise conversion from raster to vector, converting a raster image to black-and-white is a useful first step.

2. Denoising this black-and-white image.
Although converting a raster image to black-and-white comes a long way for vectorizing that image, the black-and-white image after the conversion is in fact, noisy. That is, the image is in black-and-white and for the most part, represents the shape of the structure that is depicted in the original raster image. However, there is same granularity, some noise, on the edges of the structure after the conversion. This is, of course something that is not desirable, since this only makes it harder to trace this image. That is, tracing the image in this state can result in multiple, irrelevant curves in the output, instead of a single curve that represents the structure. This is not something we want, since the irrelevant curves will simply result in erroneous structure constructions. Hence, in order to remove this unwanted effect, we simply denoise the resulting black-and-white image and hence, we obtain a smooth black-and-white image that is much more suitable for producing a fine and sharp vector image.

3. "Tracing" this denoised, black-and-white image in order to obtain an SVG image. Theoretically, the raster image can be traced into a vector image using any method. Specifically, we are using the open source program named Potrace, written by Peter Selinger, for this task.
One of the rather important reasons for converting the original raster image to black-and-white, instead of directly tracing it (that is, creating a vector image out of it) is that the tracer (vectorizer) software that we use, Potrace, works only on black-and-white images. That is, the behavior of Potrace for non black-and-white images is undefined. Hence, we opt to use a black-and-white image as the input for Potrace. That is the main reason that we convert the original raster image into black-and-white, instead of feeding it to Potrace as is.

4. Potrace traces the raster image into a vector image successfully. However, in the output, it uses SVG `path` elements. For general purposes, this is perfectly fine. However, the main reason that we need the SVG is in order to be able to cleanly determine the outlines of the structure represented by the raster image. The reason for doing this is as follows: When the image is in one of the raster formats, determining the outline of the structure represented by this raster image is not very straightforward. However, since all we need for the purpose of generating a Science Birds structure is the outline of the structure represented in the raster image, we need a way to somehow attain the information about the outline of the structure represented in the raster image. This is where the SVG, specifically an SVG with a `polygon` element, comes into play. Normally raster images represent an image as a collection of pixels. Basically, in a raster image, there is no notion of a shape. That is, in a raster image, mostly the image is represented as a collection of independent picture elements (pixels). Hence, in a raster image, it is not straightforward at all to determine what sort of shape is being represented by this image. In other words, there is no proper notion of a "shape" in a raster image.

On the other hand, vector image formats are the opposite of raster image formats. While raster image formats usually represent an image as an unrelated collection of picture elements, a vector image format, on the other hand, represents an image as a collection of shapes. It is this fundamental difference in the approach of image representation that differentiates the raster and the vector image formats. Since a vector format represents an image as a collection of shapes, a vector image is not as prone to alterations in the image quality as a result of altering the viewing point of the image. For example, a vector image is almost immune to degradation in quality when zooming in the image. It simply shows the zoomed in detail of the image as represented among the shape declarations of the vector image. It is precisely this characteristic of vector images, specifically SVG, that catches our attention. As we have stated before, for the purpose of generating a Science Birds level from an input raster image, all the information that we need from that raster image is simply the shape, that is, the outline, that this raster image represents. This outline information is best conveyed to out program with an SVG image that represents the image with an SVG `polygon` element. Hence, this is precisely the reason that we need an SVG image with a `polygon` element in order to cleanly attain the information about the outline of the structure represented in the raster image.
